---
layout: post
title:  "Object-Oriented Programming (pt. 1)"
date: 2019-07-18 06:00:00 -0600
week: 10
number: 1
tags: lab
---

Object-Oriented Programming, often abbreivated as OOP, is a programming paradigm in which properties and behaviors are bundled into more generalized objects. Anything can be described as an abstract object: a person, a car, an animal, etc..

An object describing a person, for example, might contain the following information: name, age, height, hair color, eye color, weight, etc.. In other words, all person objects will share these same features.

An object can also describe behaviors or actions. All person objects, for example, may include the following possible behaviors: talking, standing, walking, running, sitting, breathing, etc..


## Classes

Every object in Python 3 is an instance of some `class`. One can think of a class as a blueprint, or recipe, that defines and creates objects. Returning to the person example from above, one would more accurately say that `Person` is the class that contains information common to all people: name, age, height, weight, etc.. Classes are defined with the `class` keyword and a name (the first letter of the name is always capitalized, btw). For example:

```python
class Person:
    pass
```

* Note: `pass` is a placeholder used only while prototyping.

One can now create an instance of the `Person()` class as follows:

1. declare a variable to store an instance of `Person()`: `test = Person()`
2. check to make sure `test` is an instance of `Person()`: `test`

Step 2. should result in something like this in the output: `<__main__.Person at 0x10df1e470>`, which simply confirms that `test` is of type `Person`


## The Constructor Method

The Constructor Method is used to initialize data. Every class has a constructor method, sometimes referred to as the `initialization` method, and it is always the first thing in a class. Run the following and then follow the numbered steps below to see The Constructor Method in action:

```python
class Person:

    def __init__(self):
        print("here is a person")
```

1. `test = Person()`

Step 1 prints the message "here is a person" as soon as the Constructor Method is run. Note that we only had to create an instance of the class to run The Constructor Method, as it is automatically initialized (i.e. automatically run).


## Instance Variables

Every person has a name, right? If we are creating an instance of a `Person()` it would seem logical to also denote the name of that person when an object (or person) is initialized. We could update our class to reflect this more detailed model of a `Person()` like so:

```python
class Person:

    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name
        print("A person named " + str(name))
```

1. `person1 = Person("Marcus")`

The Constructor Method now does two things: it initializes an instance of `Person()` and prints the name of that person. Note that we now **have** to provide an instance of `Person()` with a name, otherwise we get an error. The variable `name` is an instance variable, or a variable whose information one can expect to be different for every instance (or `Person`) initialized by the `Person()` class.

In other words, we could now create multiple people with something like the following:

1. `person1 = Person("Marie")`
2. `person2 = Person("Steve")`

Let's now update our `Person()` class to reflect the age of each person as an instance variable:

```python
class Person:

    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.name = name
        self.age = age
        print("A person named " + str(self.name) + " who is " + str(self.age) + " years old.")
```

1. `person1 = Person("Marie", 20)`
2. `person2 = Person("Steve", 22)`

Once intialized, we can ask Python to tell us the age of either of our people with something like the following: `person1.age` and `person2.age`


## Instance Methods

A class can perform actions with `instance methods`. Previously we printed the name and age of our people with the Constructor Method, but it might make more sense to write a method called `description()` to print this information only when necessary. Follow along:

```python
class Person:

    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.name = name
        self.age = age

    def description(self):
        return "{} is {} years old".format(self.name, self.age)
```

1. create an instance of a person: `person1 = Person("Marie", 20)`
2. run the `description` instance method on `person1` to see their name and age: `person1.description()`
